---
title: "Protecting Against Arbitrage"
author: Matthew Doty"
date: "2019-02-14"
keywords: [Probability, Finance, Gambling]
---

I am proud to announce my first conference talk! I will be presenting at the [_17th International Conference on Gambling and Risk Taking_](https://www.unlv.edu/igi/conference). In preparation, I have created this blog.

To kick this blog off, I draw attention to a way gamblers can be vulnerable to exploitation and what we can do about it.

There are times when a gambler when will always lose.  We like to think that for every set of wagers, there is a slim chance of coming out on top.  It could be one in a billion or some other infinitesimal chance. We like to think there is still _some_ chance.  This is not the case.  Some sets of wagers will lose in every outcome.  Economists call these _arbitrage opportunities_. Some traders seek out these arbitrage opportunities.  They know they will make an assured profit when they find one.  We call these traders _book makers_, or _bookies_ for short.

Some economists have no sympathy for the vulnerable gamblers.  These economists argue the market will take advantage of them as soon as they arrive.  They say _a fool and his money are soon parted_.  The market is dog-eat-dog. No gamblers making faulty wagers should survive.

Such cutthroat economists perspectives are compassionless and there must be a better way.

By applying engineering we should be able to protect gamblers.  An exploitable set of wagers is a kind of mathematical error.  Engineering has a long history of designing systems that are robust to errors.  For instance there are error correcting codes in telecommunications.  The voyager space probe used such a code invented by @golay_notes_1949.  Credit cards all include a three digit security code to protect against copy errors. @luhn_computer_1960 first introduced  these codes in a patent. _Qubits_ are the fundamental unit of computation for quantum computers.  They exist in a fragile _superposition_ of quantum states which can break down. At MIT @cory_experimental_1998 ran the first experiment proving a quantum error correction code. Engineering like this may hold the key to quantum computation.
